---
title: Classification of Sets
author: Frederic Schuller (notes by John Waczak)
date: \today
---
based on [this lecture](https://youtu.be/6EIWRg-6ftQ)

## 1.6 Classification of Sets
Important exercise: every time we introduce an object in mathematics, we need to explore the classification of the object. In other words, what types of *sets* are there. This is a recurring theme in mathematics.  

In general, we classify *mathematical spaces* by means of **structure preserving maps** between those spaces. A **space** is meant to be some set equipped with some **structure** (i.e. vector space, group, topology, manifold, etc...).  

**Def**: A *map* $\phi:A\to B$ is a relation such that 
\begin{equation}
    \forall a \in A: \exists ! b \in B : \; \phi(a, b) \text{  is true}
\end{equation}

**Notation**: Our standard notation is to write
\begin{align}
    &\phi:A\to B \\ 
    &a\mapsto \phi(a) := b
\end{align}


*Further terminology*
- $A$ is the domain of $\phi$
- $B$ is the target of $\phi$ 
- $\phi(A) \equiv im_\phi(A) := \{\phi(a) \in B \; | \; a \in A\}$

**Def**: A map $\phi:A\to B$ is 
- surjective if $\phi(A) = B$ 
- injective if $\phi(a_1) = \phi(a_2) \Rightarrow a_1 = a_2$
- bijective if injective and surjective

**Def**: Two sets $A$ and $B$ are called (set theoretically) **isomorphic**, denoted $A\cong_{\text{set}} B$, if there exists a bijection $\phi:A\to B$.  

**Remark**: If there is *any* bijection at all $A\to B$, then generically there are *many*.  

The intuition is to pair up elements of $A$ and $B$.  


### Classification of Sets
A set $A$ is 
- **infinite** if there exists a proper subset $B\subset A$ that is isomorphic to $A$, i.e. $B\cong_{\text{set}} A$. Ex: $\mathbb{N}\subset\mathbb{Z}$, but $\mathbb{N}\cong_{\text{set}}\mathbb{Z}$.
  - $A$ is called **countably infinite** if $A\cong_{\text{set}}\mathbb{N}$
  - $A$ is called **uncountably infinite** otherwise
- **finite** otherwise. Then for some $N$, $A\cong_{\text{set}} \{1, 2, ..., N\}$. We say $|A|=N$.


Some more words on maps: 
- given two maps $\phi:A\to B$ and $\psi:B\to C$, one can construct a third map called $\psi \circ \phi:A\to C$ (read aloud as "$\psi$ after $\phi$") such that $a\mapsto \psi(\phi(a))$.

<!-- https://q.uiver.app/?q=WzAsMyxbMCwxLCJBIl0sWzEsMCwiQiJdLFsyLDEsIkMiXSxbMCwxLCJcXHBoaSJdLFsxLDIsIlxccHNpIl0sWzAsMiwiXFxwc2kgXFxjaXJjIFxccGhpIiwyXV0= -->
<iframe class="quiver-embed" src="https://q.uiver.app/?q=WzAsMyxbMCwxLCJBIl0sWzEsMCwiQiJdLFsyLDEsIkMiXSxbMCwxLCJcXHBoaSJdLFsxLDIsIlxccHNpIl0sWzAsMiwiXFxwc2kgXFxjaXJjIFxccGhpIiwyXV0=&embed" width="432" height="304" style="border-radius: 8px; border: none;"></iframe>

We say this diagram *commutes*, i.e. you can go either way to get to $C$ from $A$.  

Obviously, composition $\circ$, is associative. (draw a diagram like above to convince yourself)  


**Def**: Let $\phi:A\to B$ be a bijection. Then the inverse of $\phi$ is the map 
\begin{align}
    \phi^{-1}:B\to A \\ 
    b\mapsto \phi^{-1}(b)
\end{align}
such that $\phi^{-1} \circ \phi = id_{B}$

<!-- https://q.uiver.app/?q=WzAsMixbMCwwLCJBIl0sWzIsMCwiQiJdLFsxLDAsIlxccGhpXnstMX0iLDAseyJjdXJ2ZSI6LTJ9XSxbMCwxLCJcXHBoaSIsMCx7ImN1cnZlIjotMn1dXQ== -->
<iframe class="quiver-embed" src="https://q.uiver.app/?q=WzAsMixbMCwwLCJBIl0sWzIsMCwiQiJdLFsxLDAsIlxccGhpXnstMX0iLDAseyJjdXJ2ZSI6LTJ9XSxbMCwxLCJcXHBoaSIsMCx7ImN1cnZlIjotMn1dXQ==&embed" width="432" height="176" style="border-radius: 8px; border: none;"></iframe>

**Def**: Let $\phi:A\to B$ be any map. Then we define the set 
\begin{equation}
    \text{preim}_{\phi}(V) := \{a \in A \; | \; \phi(a)\in V\subseteq B\}
\end{equation}
called the preimage of the set $V\subseteq B$ with respect to the map $\phi$.


## 1.7 Equivalence Relations

**Def**: Let $M$ be a set and $\sim$ a relation such that
1. **reflexivity**: $\forall m\in M: m \sim m$.
2. **symmetry**: $\forall m,n \in M: m \sim n \Leftrightarrow n \sim n$
3. **transitivity**: $\forall m, n, p  \in M: (m\sim n)\wedge (n \sim p) \Rightarrow m\sim p$
then $\sim$ is called an **equivalence relation** on $M$.  

Examples: 
1. $p\sim q: \Leftrightarrow$  "p is of the same opinion as q" is reflexive, symmetric, transitive
2. $p\sim q: \Leftrightarrow$ "p is the sibling of q" is not reflexive.
3. $p\sim q: \Leftrightarrow$ "p is taller than q" is transitive but not reflexive or symmetric.
4. $p \sim q: \Leftrightarrow$ "p is in love with q" is not reflexive, not symmetric (necessarily), not transitive


**Def**: Let $\sim$ be an equivalence relation on $M$. hen for any $m\in M$, define the set 
\begin{equation}
    [m] := \{ n \in M \; | \; m \sim n \}
\end{equation}
called the **equivalence class** of $m$.

There are two key properties of equivalence classes
1. $a \in [m] \Rightarrow [a] = [m]$ In words: any element of $[m]$ can act as a representative for the set.
2. Either $[m]=[n]$ or $[m]\cap[n]=\emptyset$.


**Def**: Let $\sim$ be an equivalence relation on $M$, then define the so-called **quotient set**
\begin{equation}
    M/\mathord{\sim} \; := \; \{ [m] \;|\; m \in M \}
\end{equation}

**Remark**: Due to the axiom of choice, there exists a complete system of representatives for $\sim$, i.e. a set $R$ such that $R\cong_{\text{set}} M/\mathord{\sim}$

**Remark**: Care must be taken when defining maps whose domain is a quotient set and if one uses representatives to define the map.  

Ex: $M = \mathbb{Z}$, define the equivalence relation $m\sim n :\Leftrightarrow m-n \in 2\mathbb{Z}$.  
Then $[0] = [2] = [4] = [-2] = [-4] ...$  
and $[1] = [3] = [5] = [-3] ...$  

So that $\mathbb{Z}/\mathord{\sim} = \{[0], [1]\}$

Idea: on $\mathbb{Z}$ we have an addition $+:\mathbb{Z}\times\mathbb{Z}\to\mathbb{Z}$. We wish to inherit an addition $\oplus:\mathbb{Z}/\mathord{\sim}\times \mathbb{Z}/\mathord{\sim} \to \mathbb{Z}/\mathord{\sim}$ so that $[a]\oplus[b] := [a + b]$

Care must be taken as this may be ill-defined. We must check whether choice of representatives matters.


## 1.8 Construction of $\mathbb{N}$, $\mathbb{Z}$, $\mathbb{Q}$, and $\mathbb{R}$.
recall that from the axiom of infinity we have 
\begin{equation}
    \mathbb{N} := \{0, 1, 2, ...\} = \{\emptyset, \{\emptyset\}, \{\{\emptyset\}\}, ...\}
\end{equation}
now we wish to establish addition on $\mathbb{N}$. The idea is to define a *successor* map.
\begin{align}
    S:\mathbb{N}\to \mathbb{N} \\ 
    n \mapsto \{n\}
\end{align}
example: $S(2) = S(\{\{\emptyset\}\}) = \{\{\{\emptyset\}\}\} = 3$. 

The *predecessor* map is defined on $\mathbb{N}^*:= \mathbb{N}\setminus\{0\}$ as
\begin{align}
    P:\mathbb{N}^* \to \mathbb{N} \\ 
    n \mapsto n \text{ s.t. } m\in n
\end{align}
ex: $P(2) = P(\{\{\emptyset\}\}) = \{\emptyset\} = 1$.

**Def**: The $n\in \mathbb{N}$-th power of $S$ is defined recursively as 
\begin{align}
    S^n &:= S\circ S^{P(n)} \text{ if } n \in \mathbb{N}^* \\ 
    S^0 &:= id_{\mathbb{N}}
\end{align}

**Def**: Addition $+:\mathbb{N}\times\mathbb{N} \to \mathbb{N}$ is defined such that 
$(m,n)\mapsto m+n := S^n(m)$

We observe that this is commutative and associative. What about the neutral element of $+$? It's $0$. What about the inverse element? That doesn't work for $\mathbb{N}$. So we don't yet have a group.

### Integer Numbers
We claim that you can define $\mathbb{Z}$ as the quotient set 
\begin{equation}
    \mathbb{Z} := \left(\mathbb{N} \times \mathbb{N} \right)/\mathop{\sim}
\end{equation}
for some suitable equivalence relation $\sim$.  

Call $(m,n)\sim (p, q) :\Leftrightarrow m+q = p+n$. The idea here is to identify equivalence classes of differences $m-n$ and $p-q$. Since we don't have $-$ yet, just move them to the opposite side.

**Identify**: Usually we want $\mathbb{N}\subseteq\mathbb{Z}$ but this makes no sense. What is true is that you can embed $\mathbb{N}$ into $\mathbb{Z}$ via $n\mapsto [(n, 0)]$.

**Def** $-n := [(0, n)]\in \mathbb{Z}$

**Def**: $+_{\mathbb{Z}}:\mathbb{Z}\times\mathbb{Z}\to\mathbb{Z}$ is given by
\begin{equation}
    [(m,n)] +_{\mathbb{Z}} [(p, q)] := [(m+p, n+q)] 
\end{equation}

example: $2 +_{\mathbb{Z}}(-3) = [(2,0)] + [(0, 3)] = [(2, 3)] = [(0, 1)] = (-1)$


### Rational Numbers
We define the set $\mathbb{Q} := \mathbb{Z} \times \mathbb{Z}^*/\mathord{\sim}$ where $\sim$ is defined such that 
\begin{equation}
    (x, y) \sim (u, v) :\Leftrightarrow xv = uy
\end{equation}

*Intuition*: $\dfrac{x}{y}\sim [(x,y)]$ where we need equivalence classes since $2/3 = 4/6$.  

*Observation*: We can embed $\mathbb{Z}$ into $\mathbb{Q}$ via $x\mapsto [(x,1)]$.  

**Def**: $+_{\mathbb{Q}}:\mathbb{Q}\times\mathbb{Q}\to \mathbb{Q}$ such that 
\begin{equation}
    [(x,y)]+_{\mathbb{Q}}[(u, v)] := [(x*v+y*u, y*v)]
\end{equation}
further, define $\cdot_{\mathbb{Q}}:\mathbb{Q}\times\mathbb{Q}\to\mathbb{Q}$ via 
\begin{equation}
    [(x,y)]\cdot_{\mathbb{Q}}[(u,v)] := [(xu, yv)]
\end{equation}

### Real Numbers
We define $\mathbb{R} := \mathscr{A}/\mathord{\sim}$ where $\mathscr{A}$ is the set of almost homomorphisms on $\mathbb{Z}$. 
